
6 INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

upon them in a different hand and with no division into columns. 
All the rest is tolerably legible with the aid of a magnifying glass. 
Of the treatises of Archimedes which are found in other MSS., the 
new MS. contains, in great part, the books On the Sphere and 
Cylinder, almost the whole of the work On Spirals, and some parts 
of th.Q Measurement of a Circle and of the books On the Equilibrium 
of Planes. But the important fact is that it contains (1) a con- 
siderable proportion of the work On Floating Bodies which was 
formerly supposed to be lost so far as the Greek text is concerned 
and only to have survived in the translation by Wilhelm von 
Morbeke, and (2), most precious of all, the greater part of the 
book called, according to its own heading, 'E^oSos and elsewhere, 
alternatively, 'E(^d8iov or 'E^oSikoV, meaning Method. The portion 
of this latter -work contained in the MS. has already been published 
by Heiberg (1) in Greek* and (2) in a German translation with 
commentary by Zeuthenf. The treatise was formerly only known 
by an allusion to it in Suidas, who says that Theodosius wrote a 
commentary upon it ; but the Metrica of Heron, newly discovered 
by R. Schone and published in 1903, quotes three propositions from 
itj, including the two main propositions enunciated by Archimedes 
at the beginning as theorems novel in character which the method 
furnished a means of investigating. Lastly the MS. contains two 
short propositions, in addition to the preface, of a work called 
Stomachion (as it might be "Neck-Spiel" or " Qual-Geist ") which 
treated of a sort of Chinese puzzle known afterwards by the name 
of " loculus Archimedius '' ; it thus turns out that this puzzle, which 
Heiberg was formerly disinclined to attribute to Archimedes §, is 
really genuine. 

The Method, so happily recovered, is of the greatest interest for 
the following reason. Nothing is more characteristic of the classical 
works of the great geometers of Greece, or more tantalising, than 
the absence of any indication of the steps by which they worked 
their way to the discovery of their great theorems. As they have 
come down to us, these theorems are finished masterpieces which 
leave no traces of any rough-hewn stage, no hint of the method 
by which they were evolved. We cannot but suppose that the 

* Hermes xlii. 1907, pp. 243—297. 

t Bibliotheca Mathematica VII3, 1906-7, pp. 321 — 863. 

t Heronis Alexandrini opera, Vol. in. 1903, pp. 80, 17 ; 130, 15 ; 130, 25. 

§ Yide The Works of Archimedes, p. xxii. 



INTRODUCTORY NOTE 7 

Greeks had some method or methods of analysis hardly less powerful 
than those of modern analysis ; yet, in general, they seem to have 
taken pains to clear away all traces of the machinery used and all 
the litter, so to speak, resulting from tentative efforts, before they 
permitted themselves to publish, in sequence carefully thought out, 
and with definitive and rigorously scientific proofs, the results 
obtained. A partial exception is now furnished by the Method; for 
here we have a sort of lifting of the veil, a glimpse of the interior 
of Archimedes' workshop as it werp. He tells us how he discovered 
certain theorems in quadrature and cubature, and he is at the same 
time careful to insist on the difference between (1) the means which 
may be sufficient to suggest the truth of theorems, although not 
furnishing scientific proofs of them, and (2) the rigorous demonstra- 
tions of them by irrefragable geometrical methods which must follow 
before they can be finally accepted as established ; to use Archi- 
medes' own terms, the former enable theorems to be investigated 
{Oewpeiv) but not to be proved (aVoSetxvuVat). The mechanical 
method, then, used in our treatise and shown to be so useful for 
the discovery of theorems is distinctly said to be incapable of 
furnishing proofs of them ; and Archimedes promises to add, as 
regards the two main theorems enunciated at the beginning, the 
necessary supplement in the shape of the formal geometrical proof. 
One of the two geometrical proofs is lost, but fragments of the other 
are contained in the MS. which are sufficient to show that the 
method was the orthodox method of exhaustion in the form in 
which Archimedes applies it elsewhere, and to enable the proof to 
be reconstructed. 

The rest of this note will be best understood after the treatise 
itself has been read ; but the essential features of the mechanical 
method employed by Archimedes are these. Suppose X to be a 
plane or solid figure, the area or content of which has to be found. 
The method is to weigh infinitesimal elements of X (with or without 
the addition of the corresponding elements of another figure C) 
against the corresponding elements of a figure B, B and C being 
such figures that their areas or volumes, and the position of the 
centre of gravity of B, are known beforehand. For this purpose 
the figures are first placed in such a position that they have, as 
common diameter or axis, one and the same straight hne ; if then 
the infinitesimal elements are sections of the figures made by parallel 
planes perpendicular (in general) to the axis and cutting the figures, 



8 INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

the centres of gravity of all the elements lie at one point or other 
on the common diameter or axis. This diameter or axis is produced 
and is imagined to be the bar or lever of a balance. It is sufficient 
to take the simple case where the elements of X alone are weighed 
against the elements of another figure B. The elements which cor- 
respond to one another are the sections of X and B respectively by 
any one plane perpendicular (in general) to the diameter or axis 
and cutting both figures; the elements are spoken of as straight 
lines in the case of plane figurea and as plane areas in the case of 
solid figures. Although Archimedes calls the elements straight lines 
and plane areas respectively, they are of course, in the first case, 
indefinitely narrow strips (areas) and, in the second case, indefinitely 
thin plane laminae (solids) ; but the breadth or thickness {dx, as 
we might call it) does not enter into the calculation because it is 
regarded as the same in each of the two corresponding elements 
which are separately weighed against each other, and therefore 
divides out. The number of the elements in each figure is in- 
finite, but Archimedes has no need to say this ; he merely says 
that X and B are made up of all the elements in them respectively, 
i.e. of the straight lines in the case of areas and of the plane areas 
in the case of solids. 

The object of Archimedes is so to arrange the balancing of the 
elements that the elements of X are all applied at one point of 
the lever, while the elements of B operate at difierent points, 
namely where they actually are in the first instance. He con- 
trives therefore to move the elements of X away from their first 
position and to concentrate them at one point on the lever, while 
the elements of B are left where they are, and so operate at their 
respective centres of gravity. Since the centre of gravity of B as 
a whole is known, as well as its area or volume, it may then be 
supposed to act as one mass applied at its centre of gravity ; and 
consequently, taking the whole bodies X and B as ultimately placed 
respectively, we know the distances of the two centres of gravity 
from the fulcrum or point of suspension of the lever, and also the 
area or volume of B. Hence the area or volume of X is found. 
The method may be applied, conversely, to the problem of finding 
the centre of gravity of X when its area or volume is known before- 
hand ; in this case it is necessary that the elements of X, and 
therefore X itself, should be weighed in the places where they are, 
and that the figures the elements of which are moved to one single 



INTRODUCTORY NOTE 9 

point of the lever, to be weighed there, should be other figures and 
not X. 

The method will be seen to be, not integration, as certain 
geometrical proofs in the great treatises actually are, but a clever 
device for avoiding the particular integration which would naturally 
be used to find directly the area or volume required, and making 
the solution depend, instead, upon another integration the result of 
which is already known. Archimedes deals with moments about 
the point of suspension of the lever, i.e. the products of the ele- 
ments of area or Volume into the distances between the point of 
suspension of the lever and the centres of gravity of the elements 
respectively ; and, as we said above, while these distances are 
different for all the elements of B, he contrives, by moving the 
elements of X, to make them the same for all the elements of X 
in their final position. He assumes, as known, the fact that the 
sum of the moments of each particle of the figure B acting at 
the point where it is placed is equal to the moment of the whole 
figure applied as one mass at one point, its centre of gravity. 

Suppose now that the element of X is it . dx, u being the length 
or area of a section of X by one of a whole series of parallel planes 
cutting the lever at right angles, x being measured along the lever 
(which is the common axis of the two figures) from the point of 
suspension of the lever as origin. This element is then supposed 
to be placed on the lever at a constant distance, say a, from the 
origin and on the opposite side of it from B. If v! . dx is the cor- 
responding element of B cut off by the same plane and x its distance 
from the origin, Archimedes' argument establishes the equation 

rk rk 

a I udx = I xu'dx. 
Jh Jh 

Now the second integral is known because the area or volume of 
the figure B (say a triangle, a pyramid, a prism, a sphere, a cone, 
or a cylinder) is known, and it can be supposed to be applied as 
one mass at its centre of gravity, which is also known ; the integral 
is equal to bU, where b is the distance of the centre of grayity from 
the point of suspension of the lever, and U is the area or content 
of B. Hence 

the area or volume of X = — . 

a 

In the case where the elements of X are weighed along with the 
corresponding elements of another figure C against corresponding 



10 INTRODUCTOEY NOTE 

elements of B, we have, if v be the element of G, and V its area 
or content, 

udx + a I vdx= I xu'dx 
h Jh Jh 

and (area or volume oi X + V)a = hU. 

In the particular problems dealt with in the treatise h is always 
= 0, and h is often, but not always, equal to a. 

Our admiration of the genius of the greatest mathematician of 
antiquity must surely be increased, if that were possible, by a 
perusal of the work before us. Mathematicians will doubtless 
agree that it is astounding that Archimedes, writing (say) about 
250 B.C., should have been able to solve such problems as those of 
finding the volume and the centre of gravity of any segment of a 
sphere, and the centre of gravity of a semicircle, by a method so 
simple, a method too (be it observed) which would be quite rigorous 
enough for us to-day, although it did not satisfy Archimedes himself. 

Apart from the mathematical content of the book, it is in- 
teresting, not only for Archimedes' explanations of the course which 
his investigations took, but also for the allusion to Democritus as 
the discoverer of the theorem that the volumes of a pyramid and 
a cone are one-third of the volumes of a prism and a cylinder 
respectively which have the same base and equal height. These 
propositions had always been supposed to be due to Eudoxus, and 
indeed Archimedes himself has a statement to this eflFect*. It 
now appears that, though Eudoxus was the first to prove them 
scientifically, Democritus was the first to assert their truth. I have 
elsewhere t made a suggestion as to the probable course of Democritus' 
argument, which, on Archimedes' view, did not amount to a proof 
of the propositions ; but it may be well to re-state it here. Plutarch, 
in a well-known passage J, speaks of Democritus as having raised the 
following question in natural philosophy (<^i;o-ik(us) : " if a cone were 
cut by a plane parallel to the base [by which is clearly meant a 
plane indefinitely near to the base], what must we think of the 
surfaces of the sections ? Are they equal or unequal ? For, if they 
are unequal, they will make the cone irregular, as having many 
indentations, like steps, and unevennesses ; but, if they are equal, 
the sections will be equal, and the cone will appear to have the 
property of the cylinder and to be made up of equal, not unequal, 

* On the Sphere and Cylinder, Preface to Book i. 

t The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements, Vol. in. p. 368. 

J Plutarch, Be Comm. Not. adv. Stoicos xxxix. 3. 



INTRODQCTOEY NOTE 11 

circles, which is very absurd," The phrase "made up of equal... 
circles" (e^ tcrwv (rvyKeifievo<s...KVK\(i>v) shows that Democritus already 
had the idea of a solid being the sum of an infinite number of 
parallel planes, or indefinitely thin laminae, indefinitely near to- 
gether : a most important anticipation of the same thought which 
led to such fruitful results in Archimedes. If then we may make 
a conjecture as to Democritus' argument with regard to a pyramid, 
it seems probable that he would notice that, if two pyramids of the 
same height and with equal triangular bases are respectively cut by 
planes parallel to the base and dividing the heights in the same 
ratio, the corresponding sections of the two pyramids are equal, 
whence he would infer that the pyramids are equal because they 
are the sums of the same infinite numbers of equal plane sections 
or indefinitely thin laminae. (This would be a particular anti- 
cipation of Cavalieri's proposition that the areal or solid contents 
of two figures are equal if two sections of them taken at the same 
height, whatever the height may be, always give equal straight lines 
or equal surfaces respectively.) And Democritus would of course 
see that the three pyramids into which a prism on the same base 
and of equal height with the original pyramid is divided (as in 
Eucl. XII. 7) satisfy, in pairs, this test of equality, so that the 
pyramid would be one third part of the prism. The extension to 
a pyramid with a polygonal base would be easy. And Democritus 
may have stated the proposition for the cone (of course without an 
absolute proof) as a natural inference from the result of increasing 
indefinitely the number of sides in a regular polygon forming the 
base of a pyramid. 

In accordance with the plan adopted in The Works of Archimedes, 
I have marked by inverted commas the passages which, on account 
of their importance, historically or otherwise, I have translated 
literally from the Greek ; the rest of the tract is reproduced in 
modern notation and phraseology. Words and sentences in square 
brackets represent for the most part Heiberg's conjectural restoration 
(in his German translation) of what may be supposed to have been 
written in the places where the MS. is illegible; in a few cases 
where the gap is considerable a note in brackets indicates what the 
missing passage presumably contained and, so far as necessary, how 
the deficiency may be made good. 

T. L. H. 

7 June 1912. 



THE METHOD OF AECHIMEDES TREATING 

OF MECHANICAL PROBLEMS— 

TO ERATOSTHENES 

"Archimedes to Eratosthenes greeting. 

I sent you on a former occasion some of the theorems 
discovered by me, merely writing out the enunciations and 
inviting you to discover the proofs, which at the moment 
I did not give. The enunciations of the theorems which I 
sent were as follows. 

1. If in a right prism with a parallelogrammic base a 
cylinder be inscribed which has its bases in the opposite 
parallelograms*, and its sides [i.e. four generators] on the 
remaining planes (faces) of the prism, and if through the 
centre of the circle which is the base of the cylinder and 
(through) one side of the square in the plane opposite to 
it a plane be drawn, the plane so drawn will cut off from 
the cylinder a segment which is bounded by two planes 
and the surface of the cylinder, one of the two planes being 
the plane which has been drawn and the other the plane 
in which the base of the cylinder is, and the surface being 
that which is between the said planes ; and the segment cut 
off from the cylinder is one sixth part of the whole prism. 

2. If in a cube a cylinder be inscribed which has its 
bases in the opposite parallelograms •{■ and touches with its 
surface the remaining four planes (faces), and if there also 
be inscribed in the same cube another cylinder which has 
its bases in other parallelograms and touches with its surface 
the remaining four planes (faces), then the figure bounded 
by the surfaces of the cylinders, which is within both cylinders, 
is two-thirds of the whole cube. 

Now these theorems differ in character from those commu- 
nicated before ; for we compared the figures then in question, 

* The parallelograms are apparently squares. t i.e. squares. 



THE METHOD 13 

conoids and spheroids and segments of them, in respect of size, 
with figures of cones and cylinders : but none of those figures 
have yet been found to be equal to a solid figure bounded by 
planes; whereas each of the present figures bounded by two 
planes and surfaces of cylinders is found to be equal to one of 
the solid figures which are bounded by planes. The proofs then 
of these theorems I have written in this book and now send 
to you. Seeing moreover in you, as I say, an earnest student, 
a man of considerable eminence in philosophy, and an admirer 
[of mathematical inquiry], I thought fit to write out for you 
and explain in detail in the same book the peculiarity of a 
certain method, by which it will be possible for you to get 
a start to enable you to investigate some of the problems in 
mathematics by means of mechanics. This procedure is, I am 
persuaded, no less useful even for the proof of the theorems 
themselves ; for certain things first became clear to me by a 
mechanical method, although they had to be demonstrated by 
geometry afterwards because their investigation by the said 
method did not furnish an actual demonstration. But it is of 
course easier, when we have previously acquired, by the method, 
some knowledge of the questions, to supply the proof than 
it is to find it without any previous knowledge. This is a 
reason why, in the case of the theorems the proof of which 
Eudoxus was the first to discover, namely that the cone is 
a third part of the cylinder, and the pyramid of the prism, 
having the same base and equal height, we should give no 
small share of the credit to Democritus who was the first 
to make the assertion with regard to the said figure* though 
he did not prove it. I am myself in the position of having 
first made the discovery of the theorem now to be published 
[by the method indicated], and I deem it necessary to expound 
the method partly because I have already spoken of itf and 
I do not want to be thought to have uttered vain words, but 

♦ vepl ToO elfnin^vou ax-flliaros, in the singular. Possibly Archimedes may 
have thought of the case of the pyramid as being the more fundamental and as 
really involving that of the cone. Or perhaps "figure" may be intended for 
" type of figure." 

+ Of. Preface to Quadrature of Parabola. 



14 ARCHIMEDES 

equally because I am persuaded that it will be of no little 
service to mathematics; for I apprehend that some, either of 
my contemporaries or of my successors, will, by means of the 
method when once established, be able to discover other 
theorems in addition, which have not yet occurred to me. 

First then I will set out the very first theorem which 
became known to me by means of mechanics, namely that 

Any segment of a section of a right-angled cone {i.e. a parabola) 
is four-thirds of the triangle which has the same base and equal 
height, 

and after this I will give each of the other theorems investi- 
gated by the same method. Then, at the end of the book, 
I will give the geometrical [proofs of the propositions]... 

[I premise the following propositions which I shall use 
in the course of the work.] 

1. If from [one magnitude another magnitude be sub- 
tracted which has not the same centre of gravity, the centre 
of gravity of the remainder is found by] producing [the 
straight line joining the centres of gravity of the whole 
magnitude and of the subtracted part in the direction of 
the centre of gravity of the whole] and cutting off fi-om it 
a length which has to the distance between the said centres 
of gra\'ity the ratio which the weight of the subtracted 
magnitude has to the weight of the remainder. 

[On the Equilibrium of Planes, I. 8] 

2. If the centres of gravity of any number of magnitudes 
whatever be on the same straight line, the centre of gravity 
of the magnitude made up of all of them will be on the same 
straight line. [Cf Ibid. i. 5] 

3. The centre of gravity of any straight line is the point 
of bisection of the straight line. [Cf Ibid. i. 4] 

4. The centre of gravity of any triangle is the point in 
which the straight lines drawn from the angular points of 
the triangle to the middle points of the (opposite) sides cut 
one another. [Ihid. i. 13, 14] 

5. The centre of gravity of any parallelogram is the point 
in which the diagonals meet. [Ihid. i. 10] 



THE METHOD 15 

6. The centre of gravity of a circle is the point which is 
also the centre [of the circle]. 

7. The centre of gravity of any cylinder is the point of 
bisection of the axis. 

8. The centre of gravity of any cone is [the point which 
divides its axis so that] the portion [adjacent to the vertex is] 
triple [of the portion adjacent to the base]. 

[All these propositions have already been] proved*. [Besides 
these I require also the following proposition, which is easily 
proved : 

If in two series of magnitudes those of the first series are, 
in order, proportional to those of the second series and further] 
the magnitudes [of the first series], either all or some of them, 
are in any ratio whatever [to those of a third series], and if the 
magnitudes of the second series are in the same ratio to the 
corresponding magnitudes [of a fourth series], then the sum 
of the magnitudes of the first series has to the sum of the 
selected magnitudes of the third series the same ratio which 
the sum of the magnitudes of the second series has to the 
sum of the (correspondingly) selected magnitudes of the fourth 
series. [On Conoids and Spheroids, Prop. 1.]" 



Proposition 1 . 

Let ABG be a segment of a parabola bounded by the 
straight line AC and the parabola ABC, and let D be the 
middle point of AC. Draw the straight line BBE parallel 
to the axis of the parabola and join AB, BC. 

Then shall the segment ABC be | of the triangle ABC. 

From A draw AKF parallel to BE, and let the tangent 
to the parabola at C meet BBE in E and AKF in F. Produce 
CB to meet AF in K, and again produce GK to H, making 
KH equal to CK. 

* The problem of finding the centre of gravity of a cone is not solved in 
any extant work of Archimedes. It may ha.ye been solved either in a separate 
treatise, such as the irepl ivywv, which is lost, or perhaps in a larger mechanical 
work of which the extant books On the Equilibrium of Planes formed only a part. 



16 



ARCHIMEDES 



Consider GH as the bar of a balance, K being its middle 
point. 

Let MO be any straight line parallel to ED, and let it meet 
OF, GK, AG in M,N,0 and the curve in P. 

Now, since GE is a tangent to the parabola and GD the 
semi-ordinate, 

EB = BD; 
" for this is proved in the Elements [of Conies]*." 
Since FA, MO are parallel to EB, it follows that 

FK^KA, MN=NO. 
Now, by the property of the parabola, " proved in a lemma," 
MO:OP=GA:AO [Cf Quadrature of Parahola, Prop. 5] 
= GK : KN [Eucl. VI. 2] 

= HK:KN. 




Take a straight line TG equal to OP, and place it with its 
centre of gravity at H, so that TH = HO ; then, since N is the 
centre of gravity of the straight line MO, 

and MO:TQ = HK: KN, 

* i.e. the works on conies by Ariataeus and Euclid. Cf. the similar 
expression in On Conoids and Spheroids, Prop. 3, and Qiiadrature of Parabola, 
Prop. 3. 



THE METHOD 17 

it follows that TG at H and MO at N will be in equilibrium 
about K. [On the Equilibrium of Planes, i. 6, 7] 

Similarly, for all other straight lines parallel to DE and 
meeting the arc of the parabola, (1) the portion intercepted 
between FC, AC with its middle point on KG and (2) a 
length equal to the intercept between the curve and AG 
placed with its centre of gravity at H will be in equilibrium 
about K. 

Therefore K is the centre of gravity of the whole system 
consisting (1) of all the straight lines as MO intercepted between 
FG, AG and placed as they actually are in the figure and (2) of 
all the straight lines placed at H equal to the straight lines 
as PO intercepted between the curve and AG. 

And, since the triangle GFA is made up of all the parallel 
lines like MO, 

and the segment GBA is made up of all the straight lines like 
PO within the curve, 

it follows that the triangle, placed where it is in the figure, is 
in equilibrium about K with the segment GBA placed with its 
centre of gravity at H. 

Divide KG at W so that GK=SKW; 

then W is the centre of gravity of the triangle A GF ; " for this 
is proved in the books on equilibrium " {ev toi<; laoppoinKoi';). 
[Cf On the Equilibrium of Planes i. 15] 

Therefore AACF: (segment ABC) = HK : KW 

= 3:1. 

Therefore segment ABG=^AAGF. 

But AAGF=4>AABG. 

Therefore segment ABG = ^AABG. 

"Now the fact here stated is not actually demonstrated 
by the argument used; but that argument has given a sort 
of indication that the conclusion is true. Seeing then that 
the theorem is not demonstrated, but at the same time 

H. A. 2 



18 aechimp:des 

busjjecting that the conclusion is true, we shall have recourse 
to the geometrical demortstration which I myself discovered 
and have already published*." 



Proposition 2. 

We can investigate by the same method the propositions that 

(1) Any sphere is {in respect of solid content) four times 
the cone with hose equal to a great circle of the sphere and 
height equal to its radius; and 

(2) the cylinder with base equal to a great circle of the 
sphere and height equal to the diameter is 1^ times the sphere. 

(1) Let ABCD be a great circle of a sphere, and AG, BD 
diameters at right angles to one another. 

Let a circle be drawn about BB as diameter and in a plane 
perpendicular to AG, and on this circle as base let a cone 
be described with A as vertex. Let the surface of this cone 
be produced and then cut by a plane through G parallel to 
its base ; the section will be a circle on EF as diameter. On 
this circle as base let a cylinder be erected with height and 
axis AG, and produce GA to U, making AH equal to GA. 

Let CH be regarded as the bar of a balance, A being its 
middle point. 

Draw any straight line MN in the plane of the circle 
ABGD and parallel to BD. Let MN meet the circle in 0, P, 
the diameter AG in S, and the straight lines AJE, AF in Q, E 
respectively. Join AO. 

* The word governing tV yeaiierpoviiirriv dirdSei^ii' in the Greek text is 
rd^ofiev, a reading which seems to be doubtful and is certainly difficult to 
translate. Heiberg translates as if Td^o/iev meant "we shall give lower down" 
or "later on," but I agree with Th. Beinach {Revite gengrale des sciences puree 
et appliquges, 30 November 1907, p. 918) that it is questionable whether 
Archimedes would really have written out in full once more, as an appendix, 
a proof which, as he says, had already been published (i.e. presumably in the 
Quadrature of a Parabola). Td^o/iev, if correct, should apparently mean "we 
shall appoint,'' "prescribe" or "assign." 



THE METHOD 



19 



Through MN draw a plane at right angles to AC; 
this plane will cut the cylinder in a circle with diameter MN, 
the sphere in a circle with diameter OP, and the cone in a 
circle with diameter QB. 

Now, since MS = AG, and QS = AS, 
MS.SQ = CA.AS 
= A0' 
= OS' + SQ'- 



L V 


H 

A X G 


M 




^ 


\x 




B 


/O/Q 


S R\P\ 


D 


